1.MANAGEMENT 
Management is the force that unifies resources in the service of organisational goals. 
It is a process of getting results with and through people. Management is needed whenever people work together in an organisation. The managerial functions which include planning, organizing directing and controlling must be performed by a person who is capable of managing organized efforts, whether it is a business enterprise, religious organisation, military outfit or a social.  These functions are performed at all levels in an organisation, regardless of its type or size.  The services of management are essential in all cooperative endeavors. 
Management is concerned with human beings, who are highly unpredictable in terms of behavior. Most definitions of the term management‟ emphasis on one common idea: it is 
concerned with the accomplishment of objectives through the conscious efforts of the people performing certain functions.

For the sake of simplicity and convenience, we can broadly define it as: "Management is concerned with resources, tasks and goals". It is the process of planning organising, staffing, directing and controlling to accomplish organisational objectives through the coordinated use of human and material resources. 

1.1 NATURE OF MANAGEMENT 
The principles, concepts and techniques of management have changed over the 
period of time. Various contributions to the field of management have changed its 
nature. The nature of management can be described as follows: 
- Multidisciplinary 
Management is multidisciplinary. It draws freely ideas and concepts from the 
disciplines like economics, sociology, psychology, statistics, operations research etc. 
Management integrates the ideas taken from various disciplines and presents newer 
concepts which can be put into practice. The integration of these ideas is the major 
contribution of management. 
- Dynamic nature of principles 
Principles are developed by integration of ideas from various disciplines supported by 
practical evidence. These principles are flexible and change with the environment in 
which organization works. Continuous researches are being carried on to establish 
new principles; many older principles are changed by new principles. There is nothing permanent in management.
- Relative not absolute principle 
Management principles are relative and not absolute. They must be applied according 
to the need of the organization. Each organization is different from other. The principles 
of management should be applied in the light of prevailing conditions. 
("Relative" means something is dependent on circumstances or a point of view, while 
"absolute" means something is independent,  permanent, and not subject to 
qualification.)  
- Management science or art 
There is controversy whether management is science or art. Earlier management 
was regarded as art but now it is both science and art.  
- Universality of management 
Management is universal phenomena. Though universal, yet management principles 
are not universally applicable but are to be modified according to the needs of the 
situation. 
- Management is Goal-Oriented 
The accomplishment of several management activities advances by its appearance of 
its planned aims or objective.  
Management integrates Human, Physical and Financial Resources 
In an organisation, communal presence functions with non-human reserves like 
instruments, components, financial inventories etc. The entire establishment sticks 
together communal actions with those reserves.  
- Management is all Pervasive 
Management continues imperative in conclusive categories of organisations whether 
it continues political, communal and cultural or business which will handle and 
commands complex behaviours towards a perfect approach. We see that clubs, political parties, colleges, hospitals, business firms all require management. If more 
that an individual person is engaged in common work, then under such situation, management plays an important role. It is immaterial of the small firm in trading or large firm, all requires management.
- Management is a Group Activity 
Management is not as concerned with individual efforts as it is about groups and team work. It involves the use of teamwork to achieve predetermined goal of management. 
- Management is Decision-Making 
Management process involves decision- making at various levels. This usually includes delegation of work. Decision-making basically involves selecting the most appropriate alternative out of the several alternatives available. If there is only one 
alternative, the question of decision-making does not arise. The quality of the alternative that a manager selects determines the organisations performance. Therefore, the success or failure of managers can be judged by the quality of decisions 
that they make.


1.2 FUNCTIONS OF MANAGEMENT 
-Planning 
Planning is the primary function of management. It is looking ahead and preparing for the future. It determines in advance what should be done. It is conscious determination of future course of action. This involves determining why to take action? What action? 
How to take action? When to take action? 
Planning involves determination of specific objectives, setting policies, strategies, 
rules and procedures and preparing budgets. Planning is a function which is performed 
by managers at all levels – top, middle and supervisory. Plans made by top management for the organization as a whole may cover periods as long as five to ten years, whereas plans made by low level managers cover much shorter periods.  
- Organizing 
Organizing is the distribution of work in group-wise or section- wise for effective performance. Once the managers have established objectives and developed plans to achieve them, they must design and develop a human organization that will be able 
to carry out those plans successfully. Organizing involves dividing work into convenient tasks or duties, grouping of such 
duties in the form of positions, grouping of various positions into departments and sections, assigning duties to individual positions and delegating authority to each position so that the work is carried out as planned. 

- Staffing 
Staffing involves managing various positions of the organizational structure. It involves selecting and placing the right person at the right position. Staffing includes identifying 
the gap between manpower required and available, identifying the sources from where people will be selected, selecting people, training them, fixing the financial compensation and appraising them periodically. The success of the organization 
depends upon the successful performance of staffing function. 

- Directing 
Planning, organizing and staffing functions are concerned with the preliminary work for the achievement of organizational objectives. The actual performance of the task starts with the function of direction. This function can be called by various names namely “leading”, “directing”, “motivating”, “activating” and so on. Directing involves these sub functions: 
Communicating: It is the process of passing information from one person to another. 

- Leading
It is a process by which a manager guides and influences the work of his subordinates. 

- Motivating
It is arousing desire in the minds of workers to give their best to the enterprise. 

- Controlling 
To ensure that the achieved objectives confirm to the pre- planned objectives control 
function is necessary. Control is the process of checking to determine whether or not 
proper progress is being made towards the objectives and goals and acting if necessary to correct any deviations.  
Control involves three elements: 
• Establishing standards of performance. 
• Measuring current performance and comparing it against the established 
standard.
• Taking action to correct any performance that does not meet those standards.
 
- Innovation: 
Innovation means creating new ideas which may be either results in the development 
of new products or finding new uses for the old ones. A manager who invents new products is an innovator. One has to note that innovation is not a separate function but a part of planning. 

- Representation:
A manager has to spend a part of his time in representing his organization before various groups which have some stake in the organization. A manager has to be act as representative of a company. He has dealings with customers, suppliers, 
government officials, banks, trade unions and the like. It is the duty of every manager to have good relationship with others 


1.3 ROLE OF MANAGEMENT 
Manager performs planning, organizing, directing and controlling to achieve the organizational objectives. It has been questioned whether these functions provide an adequate description of the management process. As against these management functions Henry Mintzberg has defined the role of managers to identify what managers do in the organizations.
 
Interpersonal role: This role is concerned with his interacting with people both organizational members and outsiders. There are three types of interpersonal roles: 
• Figure head role: In this role manager has to perform duties of ceremonial nature such as attending social functions of employees, taking an important customer to lunch and so on. 
• Leader role: Manager’s leader role involves leading the subordinates motivating and encouraging them. 
• Liaison: In liaison role manager serves as a connecting link between his organization and outsiders. Managers must cultivate contacts outside to collect information useful for his organization. 
Information roles: It involves communication. There are three types of informational 
roles: 
• Monitor: In his monitoring role, manager continuously collects information about all the factors which affects his activities. Such factors may be within or outside organization. 
• Disseminator: In the disseminator role, manager possesses some of his privileged information to his subordinates who otherwise not be in a position to collect it. 
• Spokesperson: As a spokesperson manager represents his organization while interacting with outsiders like customers, suppliers, financers, government and other agencies of the society. 
Decisional roles: Decisional role involves choosing most appropriate alternative among all so that organizational objectives are achieved in an efficient manner. In his 
decisional role manager perform four roles: 
• Entrepreneur: As an entrepreneur, a manager assumes certain risks in terms of outcome of an action. A manager constantly looks out for new ideas and seeks to improve his unit by adopting it to dynamic environment. 
• Disturbance handler: In this role manager works like a fire-fighter manager contains forces and events which disturb normal functioning of his organization. The forces and events may be employee complaints and grievances, strikes, shortage of raw materials etc. 
• Negotiator: In his role of negotiator, manager negotiates with various groups in the organization. Such groups are employees, shareholders and other outside agencies.


1.4 LEVELS OF MANAGEMENT 
People in an organization are arranged in an hierarchy and they all have the relationship of superior-subordinates. Every manager in an organization performs all five management functions.  
The importance of these functions varies along the managerial levels. There may be as many levels in the organization as the number of superiors in a line of command. 
Some of these levels are merged into one on the basis nature of functions performed and authority enjoyed. E.F.L. Brech has classified management levels into three categories – Top Management, Middle Management and Supervisory/Lower Level.

Top management of an organization consists board of directors, chairman and chief executive officer. Top level management determines goals and objectives. It performs 
overall planning, organizing, staffing, directing and controlling. It integrates organization with environment, and is responsible for overall results.
  
Middle management stands between top management and supervisory management level. Middle level management establishes programs for department and carries out functions for achieving specific goals. The other functions of middle level management 
are training and development of employees, integrating various parts of the department.

Supervisory management is concerned with efficiency in using resources of the organization. A supervisor is an executor of policies and procedures making a series of decisions.

1.5 Management as both Science and Art 
Management combines features of both sciences as well as art. Management is considered as science because it has a systematic body of knowledge, is based on experimentation, and uses theories and principles to address issues. Management is considered as an art because it involves the skillful application of knowledge and 
experience to achieve desired results. Science provides knowledge & art deals with the application of knowledge and skills. To be successful in his profession, a manager must acquire the knowledge of science & the art of applying it.  
Therefore management is a judicious blend of science and art because science proves the principles and how these principles are applied is a matter of art. Science teaches 
to ’know’ and art teaches to ’do’. Example. a person cannot become a good singer unless he has knowledge about various ragas & he also applies his skill in the art of singing.  
In the same way, it is not sufficient for the manager to first know the principles he must also apply them in solving various managerial problems.  That is why, science and art are not mutually exclusive but they are complementary to each other (like tea and biscuit, bread and butter etc.)

1.6 Managerial skills
Simply, managerial skills are the knowledge and ability of the individuals in a managerial position to fulfil some specific management activities or tasks. This knowledge and ability can be learned and practiced. However, they also can be acquired through practical implementation of required activities and tasks. Managerialskill is the skill of a manager to maintain high efficiency in the way how his or her employees complete their everyday working tasks.  Because of that, managers will need skills that will help them to manage people and technology to ensure an effective and efficient utilization of their working 
hours. 
Types of managerial skills 
Robert Katz identifies three types of skills that are essential for a successful 
management process: 
• Technical skills 
• Conceptual skills 
• Human or interpersonal management skills 

Technical skills 
Technical skill is knowledge and ability of the manager to use different techniques to achieve what they want to achieve. Technical skills are not related only to machines, production tools or other equipment, but they are also skills that will be required to increase sales, design different types of products and services, market the products and services, etc. Technical skills are most important for first-level managers. When it 
comes to the top managers, these skills are not something with a high significance level. Therefore, as we go through a hierarchy from the bottom to higher levels, technical skills lose their importance.

Human or interpersonal managerial skills :
Human or interpersonal management skill is the manager’s knowledge and ability to work with people. One of the most critical management tasks is working with people. Without people, the existence of management and managers becomes redundant. 
These skills enable managers to become leaders and motivate employees for better accomplishments. Additionally, they help them to make more effective use of human potential in the company. Simply said, they are essential skills for all hierarchical levels in the company.

Conceptual skills :
Conceptual skills enable a manager to use their knowledge or ability for more abstract thinking. That means they can easily envisage the whole by means of analysis and diagnosis of the different states.  
As such, they would be in a position to predict the future of a business or department as a whole. Conceptual skills are vital for top managers, less critical for mid-level managers and not required for first-level managers. As we go from the bottom of the managerial hierarchy to the top, the importance of these skills will rise.
 
1.7 Management and Administration 
Management 
Management involves the process of strategically planning, organizing resources, coordinating efforts, directing activities, and maintaining control within an organization to achieve its intended goals and objectives. This multifaceted discipline involves 
making decisions, optimizing resource allocation, fostering collaboration among teams, providing leadership, and monitoring progress to ensure alignment with established benchmarks.  
In the context of businesses, effective management is pivotal for resource efficiency, goal attainment, and adaptability in a dynamic environment. A range of management theories and models, contribute to shaping management practices, along with 
approaches towards organizational culture and leadership. 

Administration 
Administration involves overseeing an organization's day-to-day operations, ensuring they run smoothly by implementing policies and decisions set by management. This entails tasks like managing schedules, facilitating communication, optimizing resource 
allocation, and resolving issues that arise. Administrators play a vital role in policy implementation, making certain that guidelines are followed and organizational goals are pursued.  
Their collective efforts harmonize different teams and individuals, while their adaptability enables them to respond effectively to changing circumstances. While management focuses on strategic direction, administration handles the practical and operational aspects, jointly contributing to an organization's overall functionality and achievement. In smaller settings, these roles may merge, whereas larger.
organizations might have separate departments or individuals dedicated to each function.


Difference between Management and Administration
Management refers to the art of getting work done through others by directing and coordinating their efforts to achieve specific organizational goals through teamwork. It is mainly an executing function concerned with implementing plans and policies framed by the administration. Management focuses on deciding who will do a particular task and how it should be done, and it is therefore considered a doing function. Managers work under supervision and are responsible for completing tasks efficiently. Management requires technical and human skills and generally operates at the middle and lower levels of the organization. It is mostly applicable to business or profit-making organizations. Management decisions are influenced by the values, opinions, beliefs, and judgments of managers. Managers are employees of the organization and are paid fixed remuneration in the form of salaries or wages.

Administration, on the other hand, is concerned with the formulation of broad objectives, policies, and plans of the organization. It is a decision-making and thinking function that determines what is to be done and when it is to be done, without questioning the decisions once they are made. Administration requires conceptual and human skills and operates at the top level of the organization. It is applicable mainly to non-business organizations such as schools, hospitals, clubs, and government institutions, though it also exists in business enterprises. Administrative decisions are influenced by public opinion, government policies, customs, and social or religious factors. Administration represents the owners of the organization, who earn returns on their investment in the form of profits or dividends.


1.8 PLANNING 
The management functions as discussed earlier are planning, organizing, staffing, direction and controlling. These functions are essential to achieve organizational objectives. If objectives are not set then there is nothing to organize, direct and control. An organization has to specify what it has to achieve. Planning is related with this aspect. According to Koontz and O’Donnel “Planning is deciding in advance what to do, how to do it, when to do it and who is to do it. It bridges the gap from where we are and to where we want to go.  
According to M.S. Hardly “Planning is deciding in advance what is to be done. It involves the selection of objectives, policies, procedures and programmes from among alternatives.

1.9 Nature of Planning 
- Planning: A Rational Approach 
Planning is a rational approach for defining where one stands, where one wants to go in future and how to reach there. Rationalist denotes a manager chooses appropriate means for achieving the stated objectives. Rational approach fills the gap between the 
current status and future status.  
- Planning: An Open System Approach 
Open system approach indicates that the gap between current and desired status and the action required to bridge this gap. Open system approach is influenced by a variety of environmental economic, legal, political, technological, socio-cultural and 
competitive factors. These factors are dynamic and change with time. Therefore managers have to take into account the dynamic features of environment while using open system approach. Flexibility of Planning By flexibility of a plan is meant its ability to change direction to adopt to changing situations without undue cost. The plans must be flexible to adapt to changes in 
technology, market, finance, personal and organizational factors.However flexibility is possible only within limits, because it involves extra cost. Some times the benefit of flexibility may not be worth the cost. 
-Pervasiveness of Planning 
Planning is pervasive and it extends throughout the organization. Planning is the fundamental management function and every manager irrespective of level, has a planning function to perform within his particular area of activities. Top management is responsible for overall objectives and action of the organization.it must plan what these objectives should be and how to achieve them. Similarly a 
departmental head has to devise the objectives of his department within the organizational objectives and also the methods to achieve them.

1.10 Importance of Planning 
Planning facilitates management by objectives. Planning starts with finding of an objective. It shows the reason for starting different activities. With this, the objective becomes clear and particular. With planning, an employee will be more focused towards objectives and goals. There will be no path, if there is no planning. Planning minimizes uncertainties. In business, there occur lots of uncertainties. Because of such uncertainties, there occurs risk factor in every  business. With planning, the uncertainties can be lowered as it anticipates any future   occurrences. Since future cannot be predicted 100%, so with the help of planning, the management will come to know about future activities. 
- Planning facilitates co-ordination. 
It is seen that planning moves around organisational goals. In this, all activities are aimed at common goals. There is a combined effort all the way in an enterprise in departments and groups. 
It keeps away from replication of efforts which results in good co- ordination. It solves 
the problems related to work performance which aims as altering the same. 
- Planning improves employee’s morale. 
With planning, an atmosphere of order and discipline originates that takes it as a serious aspect. Through planning employees will come to know what is required from them which results in obtaining conformity. 
- Planning helps in achieving economy. 
Good planning results in safer economy as it leads to allocation of resources. It makes admissible for correct use of resources for economic operations. There will no wastage of resources if choosing correct use will can add to objectives of an enterprise. 
-Planning facilitates controlling. 
With planning it is possible to proceed with fixed planned goals and standards of presentation. The basic of controlling is provided. An operative system of controlling is unmanageable without presence of good thought plans. 
-Planning provides competitive edge. 
Planning uses change in work methods, quality, quantity, designs, extension of work, redefining of goals etc.The forecasting will secure the future of an enterprise.
-Planning encourages innovations. 
With planning process, managers will be able to suggest ways and different means in order to improve performance. It is the decision-making function which accommodates creative thinking and imagination which shows innovative methods and growth operations of an enterprise.

1.11 Types of Plans 
• The network of various plans facilitates and guides the decision-making and actions on the part of managers. 
• Knowledge regarding single use and standing plan, appreciating the distinction between policies and strategies, policies and procedures and objective and strategy is very important for a manager before he starts the process of planning. 
• To provide guidance to the managers to make decisions, take action and solve problems, various plans are drawn up.  
• These plans help the managers in managing day-to-day affairs, exploiting resources of organisation to good effect efficiently and in regulating the work behaviour of subordinates.  
• Some of the plans do provide unifying and consistent base for managerial decision and action. These may be grouped into single use plan and standing plans.

Single Use Plans 
Objective: Future destination or desirable undertakings. 
Strategy: Course of action developed by relating strengths and weaknesses of an organisation . 
Programme: A network of policies procedures, rules and budgets designed to meet 
specific situations and all other needful actions mandatory for implementing a given course of action is included in this phase. 
Budget: This is a numerical expression of plan in terms of expected revenue and expenditure over a given period of time.
Standing Plans 
Policies: General statement that guides decision-making.
Procedure: Administrative action guide, which sets the chronological sequence for action. 
Method: Detailed manner in which a specific activity will be performed. 
Rules: Directives for regulating and controlling the working behaviour of the employees.

1.12 Steps in Planning Process 
- Establishment of objectives 
Planning should begin with setting up of goals and objectives. The objectives should carry a base for doing various activities with certain direction of efforts. An objective will stress on managers attention on particular result to get executed. Another idea of 
objectives is to display clear, precise and straight meaning. Objectives should be explained with clear quantitative terms. The goals of objectives should be explained clearly in qualitative terms. Objective should be practical, clear, adaptable, workable 
and achievable.
- Establishment of Planning Premises 
It is an assumption of events which could happen in future. It relates to finding a trend which deflects from real plans. It locates the hindrances which appear in business at particular course of operations. It concerns with taking particular steps which broadly 
avoids hindrances. It can be internal or external which covers capital investment policy, management labor relations and socio- economic and economical changes. In this you can control internal premises whereas external premises cannot be controlled. 
Choice of alternative course of action In case of forecasts, various alternative actions can be considered. It can be calculated 
based on pros and cons under light of resources present and need of organisation. It examines merits, demerits and consequences of every alternative before making any selection. Once objective and scientific evaluation is done, then the correct option is 
selected.
- Formulation of derivative plans 
It is the secondary plans that are responsible for giving any help to achievement of main plan. This plan moves from the main plan which will support and speed up the success of the plans main It covers policies, procedures, rules, programme, budgets, 
schedules, etc.It shows time schedule as well as series of achieving different tasks. 
- Securing Co-operation 
Once the plan has designed, then it is advisable to take people into confidence who are linked with it. The idea of taking subordinates into confidence as get motivation and the organisation receives valuable suggestions with the idea to enhance it further. 
Follow up/Appraisal of plans Once the action is decided, now it will be put into practice. After implementation of 
particular plan, it is advisable to judge its performance. The judgment is based on feedback or information from various departments or concerned people. With this, the management can take correct deviations or can modify the plan.

1.13 DECISION MAKING 
Decision-making can be considered as the cognitive process resulting in the selection of a course of action among several available alternatives. It is found that all decision making process will generate a final choice where the output can be perceived as an 
opinion. Precisely, decision making relates to the study of discovery and  selection of various alternatives which depends on values and choice of a decision maker.In the decision making process, uncertainty will be lowered instead of eliminated. Under such 
situations, fewer decisions are made with complete confirmation as entire knowledge of all alternatives is rarely feasible. So all 
decision uses a certain level of risk some higher than the rest. If there is no uncertainty, you do not have a decision; you have an algorithm- a set of steps that is followed to bring about a fixed result. 

The Decision-Making Process
Making a good decision is a difficult exercise. It is the product of deliberation, evaluation and thought. To make good decisions, managers should invariably follow a sequential set of steps

- Awareness of the problem 
The first step in the decision-making process is recognizing the problem. The manager should be vigilant enough to know that a problem exists and that it is important enough for managerial action. Problems generally arise because of disparity between what is and what should be. To identify the gaps between the current and desired state of affairs, managers should look for problems that need solving. They must look for occasions to arrive at decisions. The existence of a problem thus steps up the need for decision making. 
- Diagnose and state the problem 
A successful manager must have the ability to weed out the wheat from the chaff before deciding on a specific course of action. Once aware of a problem, he must state the real problem. He must try to solve the problem, not just note down the symptoms. 
Quite often, managers waste time developing solutions to the wrong problem. This is because opportunities and problems in the environment do not surface so easily.
- Develop the alternative 
Often, executives try to take up the first feasible option. The statement of the problem in clear, measurable terms enables executives to develop alternatives. The capability to expound alternatives is as important as making a right decision when selecting 
among alternatives. Ingenuity, research and creative imagination are required to make sure that the best alternatives are considered before a course of action is selected.
- Evaluate the alternatives 
In this step, the decision maker attempts to summarise the advantages and disadvantages of each alternative. The consequences if any, of each alternative must also be considered. The primary objective of evaluation is not to find out      
one magic solution but to find out a workable solution that would help to eliminate the problem for good. The attempt is made chiefly to limit the alternatives to a manageable and economically feasible number. 
- Select the best alternative 
In this step, the decision maker selects the alternative that will maximise the results in terms of existing objectives. Fortunately, Peter Drucker has offered the following criteria for making the right choice among available alternatives: 
• The risk: The manager always plays the game of calculated risks as he has to weigh the risks of each course of action against the expected gains.
• Economy of effort: The alternative that will give the greatest output for the least inputs in terms of material and human resources is obviously the best one.
• Timing: If the situation has great urgency, the best alternative is the one that 
the decision maker finds fit.
• Limitation of resources: Physical, financial and human resources impose a limit on the choice of selection. If adequate resources are not currently available, the decision should be deferred. 
- Implement and verify the decision 
After making a decision, the manager must implement it. He must see whether it has worked out or not in practicality. In other words, he must seek feedback regarding the effectiveness of the implemented solutions. 

1.14 Types of Decision-making 
The ultimate aim of decision-making is to find the option that is believed to fulfil the objective of the decision problem most satisfactorily compared to other alternatives.
- Programmed and Non-programmed Decisions 
According to Herbert Simon, programmed decisions are related to routine and repetitive problems. Information about these problems is readily available and can be processed using pre-established methods. These decisions have a short-term impact and are relatively simple, typically made at lower management levels. Decision rules and procedures are in place to streamline the decision-making process and save time. Little thought and judgment are required, as the decision-maker follows predetermined solutions. For instance, dealing with a consistently late employee can be addressed through established procedures. On the other hand, non-programmed 
decisions tackle unique or unusual problems that demand a high level of executive judgment and consideration. There are no ready-made solutions for such problems,as they require creative and thoughtful approaches.  

Examples of non-programmed decisions include introducing a new product or determining the location of a plant. These decisions are usually made by higher-level managers. 
- Routine and Strategic Decisions 
There are two types of decisions in an organization: routine (or operating) decisions and strategic (or policy) decisions. Routine Decisions are repetitive in nature and have a short-term impact, mainly concerning day-to-day operations. They are typically made at lower levels of management, using established procedures to ensure quick and efficient handling. For example, a supervisor may make routine decisions regarding employee overtime pay.  
On the other hand, strategic decisions involve long-term commitments and significant investments, influencing the entire organisation’s future. These decisions require careful deliberation and judgment and are usually made at higher levels of 
management. Examples of strategic decisions include launching a new product, selecting the location for a new plant, or implementing major organisational changes. 
- Organisational and Personal Decisions 
Organisational Decisions are made by officials in their capacity as resource allocators for the organisation. These decisions rely on sound judgment and experience and can be delegated to other individuals within the organisation. 
Organisational decisions have a direct impact on the functioning of the organization and its outcomes. On the other hand, personal decisions are made by managers as individuals and cannot be delegated. These decisions pertain to matters that directly 
affect their personal lives. While personal decisions may have implications for the individual manager, they may also indirectly affect the organisation. For instance, the decision of a chief executive to retire early could have a direct effect on 
the company’s future. 
- Individual and Group Decisions 
Individual Decisions are made by an individual based on the information available to them. These decisions may involve analyzing various variables, but they are often straightforward. However, in certain situations, significant decisions may be 
made collectively by a group. Group Decisions are taken by a team of individuals formed for this purpose, such as the decisions made by a Board of Directors or a committee. These decisions are typically crucial for the organisation. Group decision-making often leads to more realistic and well-balanced outcomes, as different perspectives are considered.  
- Tactical and Operational Decisions 
Tactical Decisions focus on how things will be done to achieve strategic goals. They are short-term and usually involve specific actions that help meet the broader objectives set by higher management. For example, a company deciding on a marketing campaign to boost sales in the next quarter is making a tactical decision. These decisions are usually made by middle managers and are meant to ensure that day-to-day operations. 
On the other hand, operational decisions deal with the routine activities necessary for running an organization. They are very short-term, often made on a daily or weekly basis, and involve specific processes and procedures. For example, a manager deciding on the daily work schedule for employees or handling customer complaints is making operational decisions. These decisions are typically made by lower-level managers or supervisors who ensure that everything runs smoothly and efficiently on a daily basis. 
- Major and Minor Decisions: 
Major Decisions are significant choices that can have a long-lasting impact.These decisions often require careful thought, research, and sometimes advice from others because they can affect the future in profound ways. On the other hand, minor 
decisions are smaller choices that we make more frequently and with less deliberation.These decisions usually have a short-term impact and can often be changed without much consequence. For major decisions, it is wise to take time, gather information, and consider the long-term implications. For minor decisions, it’s often better to make a quick choice and move on. 

1.15 ORGANIZING AND STAFFING 
MEANING AND DEFINITIONS OF ORGANIZING 
Organization is the foundation upon which the whole organization is built. Without efficient organization, no management can perform its function smoothly. Sound organization contributes greatly to the continuity and the success of organization. A poor organization structure makes good performance impossible, no matter how good the individuals are. 
The word ‘organization’ is also used widely to connote a group of people and the structure of relationships. In order to understand the meaning and characteristics of organization, we shall study it under the following heads: 
o Organization as a group of persons. 
o Organization as a structure of relationship. 
o Organization as a function of management. 
o Organization as a process. 
Organization as a group of persons:  
Organization is viewed as a group of people contributing their efforts towards certain goal. The concept of organizing generated when two or more persons began to cooperate and combine together for fulfilling their basic needs.  
Organization begins when people combine efforts for some common purpose. An organization comes into existence when there are a number of persons in communication and relationship to each other and are willing to contribute towards a common Endeavour. The group of people lay down rules and regulations and they form formal structure or relationship among themselves”. 
Organization as a structure of relationships: 
Organization sets up the scope of activities by laying down the structure of relationships. If organization is merely recognized as ‘structure’, it will be viewed as a static thing used to explain formal relationships. But an organization is a ‘dynamic’ 
entity consisting of individuals, objectives and relationships among the individuals. However, the use of the term structure to denote organization is not used independently, but is combined with the term organization either in the form of organization structure or structure of organization.
Organization as a function of management:  
Organization is one of the basic functions of management. It involves determination and provision of various resources for the achievement of predetermined goal. Thus, organization is defined as a process of integrating and coordinating the efforts of 
human, financial and other resources for the accomplishment of certain objectives.  
Organization as a process:  
Organization is the process of establishing relationship among the members of the organization. Using this process organization structure is created. The relationships are created in terms of authority and responsibility. Each person in the organization is 
assigned specific responsibility or duty to perform.
 
1.16 NATURE OF ORGANIZATION 
Organization is always related to certain objectives:  Whether it is organization of the entire enterprise or part of it, organization is influenced by objectives.  The operations are divided; authority and responsibility are determined 
to achieve predetermined objectives. 
An organization connotes a group of people:  
Mc Farland has defined organization as “an identifiable group of people contributing their efforts towards the attainment of goals. People form groups or organizations to accomplish common objectives and pool their efforts by defining and dividing various 
activities, responsibility and authority”.
 
Communication is the nervous system of organization:
The organizational members are able to communicate with each other and may coordinate their activities.  No organization can survive without an efficient system of communication. 
Organizing is a basic function of management:  
Organizing is done in relation to all other functions of management, namely planning, staffing, directing and controlling and in all the areas of business namely production, marketing, purchasing, personnel.The organizing function is performed by all 
managers. 
Organization is a continuous process:  
It is not a one step function. Managers are continuously engaged in organizing and reorganizing. 
Organization connotes a structure of relationship:  
The structure of relation- ship deliberately created by the management is referred to as formal organization. An organization may also have a network of social relationships that arise between people working together. Such relationships are 
known as informal organization. In formal organization people are able to communicate with each other, are willing to 
act and share a purpose.  In informal organization, people work together because of their likes and dislikes. 
Organization involves a network of authority and responsibility relationship:  
Various positions are created; specific tasks are assigned to them. To perform the task,each position is delegated adequate authority. Authority and responsibility relationships throughout the organization must be clearly defined to achieve coordination and to avoid conflicts between individuals and departments. 

1.17 PRINCIPLES OF ORGANIZATION 
The principles are guidelines for planning organization structure. The principles of organization are discussed below: 
Objectives:
The objectives of the enterprise influence the organization structure. Every part of the organization and organization as a whole should be geared to the basic objective determined by the enterprise. 
Specialization:  
Effective organization must promote specialization. The activities of the enterprise should be divided according to functions and assigned to persons according to their specialization. 
Span of control:  
A manager can directly supervise only a limited number of executives.Hence, it is necessary to have a proper number of subordinates answerable to a manager. A maximum of six may be prescribed for this purpose. 
Exception: 
This principle requires that organization structure should be so designed that managers are required to go through the exceptional matters only. All the routine decisions should be taken by subordinates, where as problems involving unusual matters and policy decision should be referred to higher levels. 
Scalar principle: 
This is also known as chain of command. There must be clear lines of authority running from the top to the bottom. Authority is the right to decide, direct and coordinate. Every subordinate must know who his superior is and to whom policy matters beyond his 
own authority must be referred for decision. 
Unity of command:  
Each subordinate should have only one supervisor whose command he has to obey. Dual subordination must be avoided, for it causes uneasiness, disorder, and indiscipline and undermine of authority. 
Delegation:  
Proper authority should be delegated at the lower levels of the organization also.The authority delegated must be equal to responsibility i.e., the manager should have enough authority to accomplish the task assigned to him. 
Responsibility:  
A superior should be held responsible for the acts of his subordinates. No superior should be allowed to avoid responsibility by delegating authority to his subordinates. 
Authority:  
The authority is the tool by which a manager is able to accomplish the desired objective. Hence, the authority of each manager must be clearly defined. The authority and responsibility must be co-extensive in the organization. 
Efficiency: The organization should be able to attain the mission and objectives at the minimum cost. 
Simplicity:  
The organization structure should be as simple as possible with minimum number of levels. A large number of levels of organization means difficulty of effective communication and coordination. 
Flexibility:  
The organization should be flexible, should be adaptable to changing circumstances. It should permit expansion and replacement without dislocation and disruption of the basic design. A sound organization must avoid complicated procedures, complication of control so that it may adapt itself easily and economically to business and technical changes. 
Personal abilities:  
As organization is a formal group of people there is need for proper selection, placement and training.Organization structure must ensure optimum use of human resources.

1.18 DEPARTMENTATION 
The differentiation of tasks or activities into discrete segments is called as departmentalization or departmentation. Departmentation involves grouping of operating tasks into jobs, combining of jobs into effective work group and combining 
of groups into divisions often termed as ‘departments’.
There are several ways of Departmentation, each of which is suitable for particular corporate sizes, strategies and purposes. The important methods of grouping activities may be summarized as below: 

1.18.1 Functional Departmentation : 
Organization is divided into a number of functional areas. Organization has grouping of activities in accordance with the functions of an organization such as production, marketing, finance, human resource and so on. Specialist in charge of a functional 
department has the authority over all other employees for his function.

Merits and Demerits of Functional Departmentation

Merit: Works well in repetitive and stable environments such as mass production.
Demerit: No single individual is responsible for the total project.

Merit: A low level of integration is sufficient to get the job done.
Demerit: Difficult to integrate activities across different functional lines.

Merit: Easier budgeting and better cost control.
Demerit: Conflicts may arise between functional groups struggling for power.

Merit: Provides a broad manpower base and flexibility in the use of personnel.
Demerit: No clear customer or product focal point.

Merit: Authority, responsibility, and communication are clearly defined; each person reports to only one superior.
Demerit: Decision-making is slow and tedious due to the vertical chain of command.

1.18.2 Geographical Departmentation
Organizations are sub divided into regions (e.g. North, South, East and   west) and 
each unit is responsible to meet the unique requirements of local customers.  Each 
division is responsible for certain products and has its own resources. Results in 
duplication of resources. for e.g. need to have a warehouse for   each division.  The 
regional units may operate autonomously as independent profit centers Allows for 
flexibility and quick response to environmental changes.
 
Merits and demerits of Geographical Departmentations:
This structure offers several merits as well as demerits. It enables the organization to provide personalized services to clients and allows quick responses to environmental changes, as regional units are highly market-oriented. It also helps in tapping more business opportunities in diverse areas and provides greater career opportunities and challenges to the staff. However, it also has certain limitations. Communication may become time-consuming, and if regional units are further subdivided on a functional basis, the disadvantages of functional organization may arise. Additionally, overhead costs tend to be higher due to the duplication of technical skills across different units.


1.18.3 Product  Departmentation : 
Product based organization structure will be formed when firm produces variety of 
products. for e.g. food, electric ,electronic etc. Each division designs, manufactures 
and markets its own products. Within each subdivision, one can have functional, 
geographical or any other form of breakdown.  
Merits and demerits of Product Departmentation :
Product departmentation has several merits along with certain demerits. Under this system, each product division has complete responsibility for its product line and functions as an independent profit centre, which improves accountability. A dedicated manager is appointed for each product, ensuring better focus and control. It promotes strong market orientation and enables the organization to generate new business and respond effectively to changing market conditions. It also helps in taking quick decisions to deal with product obsolescence. However, product departmentation involves high overhead costs due to the need for separate personnel and facilities for each product. Integration of people with diverse technical skills becomes difficult, and coordination between different product divisions is often low. In some cases, a highly successful product division may grow so large that it tends to function like a separate company, reducing overall organizational unity.


1.18.4 Customer oriented Departmentation: 
Here the organization is differentiated by the customer it serves. For a particular customer the organization will be formed. For e.g. a small company making thermal batteries for defense application may find it convenient to organize itself into a defense division. Such a differentiation would enable the company to interact closely with customer, in meeting the requirements, contracts and product specifications.

1.19 Committee Organisation 
“A committee is a group of persons performing a group task with the object of solving certain problems”. . A committee may formulate plans, review the performance of 
certain units or may only have the power to make recommendation. Committees help in taking corrective decision, coordinating the affairs of different departments and meeting communication requirements in the organization.  Committees can be broadly classified into advisory committees and executive committees. Advisory committees have only a recommender’s role and cannot enforce implementation of their advice or recommendation. The examples of advisory committees are works committees, finance committees etc., Whenever committees are vested with line authority, they are called as executive committees. Unlike advisory committee, executive committees not only take decisions 
but also enforce decisions and thus perform a double role of taking decision and ordering its executive. The board of directors of a company is an example of an 
executive committee.
Advantages of Committees 
• Committees provide a forum for the pooling of knowledge and experience of many persons of different skills, ages and backgrounds. 
• Committees are excellent means of transmitting information and ideas both upward and downward. 
• Committees are impersonal in action and hence their decisions are generally unbiased and are based on facts. 
• When departmental heads are members of committee, people get an opportunity to understand each others problems and hence improve coordination. 
Weaknesses of Committees 
• In case a wrong decision is taken by committee, no one is held responsible which may results in irresponsibility among members. 
• Committees delay action 
• Committees are expensive form of organization. 
• Decisions are generally arrived at on the basis of compromise and hence they are not best decision. 
• As committee consists of large number of persons, it is difficult to maintain secrecy.
 
1.20 CENTRALIZATION AND DECENTRALIZATION 
Centralization refers to systematic reservation of authority at central points within the organization. Centralization means retention or concentration of managerial authority in few key managerial positions at the nerve centre of an organization i.e., at the top level. Everything that goes to reduce the subordinate’s role in decision making is centralization. 
Decentralization means dispersal of decision-making power to lower levels of the organization. In decentralized setup, ultimate authority to command and ultimate 
responsibility for the results is localized as far down in the organization. 
According to Allen “Decentralization refers to the systematic effort to delegate to the lower levels all authority except that which can only be exercised at central points”. In 
decentralized setup large number of decision, important decisions in large number of areas are made consulting few people. 

In the words of Henry Fayol, “Everything that goes to increase the importance of subordinates role is decentralization and everything that reduces it is centralization”. 
The following are the advantages in decentralization: 
• It eases the burden of top level managers. 
• Decentralization permits quicker and better decision making. 
• With decentralization capable managers can be developed 
• Promotes participation in decision making and improves morale and motivation. 
• Decentralization facilitates diversification of products.  
Disadvantages of decentralization: 
• It increases administrative expenses. 
• It may create problems in bringing coordination among various units. 
• It may bring about inconsistencies in the company, because uniform procedures may not be followed for the same type of work in various divisions.

1.21 SPAN OF CONTROL 
The span of control indicates the number of subordinates who can be successfully directed by a supervisor. It is often referred to as span of management, span of supervision, span of authority. Span of management is important because of two reasons. First is span of management affects the efficient utilization of managers and the effective performance of the subordinates.  If the span is too wide, managers are overburdened and subordinates receive little guidance. If the span of management is too narrow, the managers are underutilized 
and subordinates are over controlled.

The second reason is there is relationship between span of management and organization structure. A narrow span results in tall organization with many levels of supervision between top management and lowest organizational levels which creates more communication and cost problems.  On the other hand, a wide span for the same number of employees results in flat 
organization with fewer management levels between top and bottom.  (Suppose a sales manager has 12 salesmen reporting to him, his span of management is 12. If he feels that he is not able to work closely enough with each salesman and decides to reduce the span by adding three assistant managers – each to supervise four salesmen then his span of management is three as shown in fig 3.7. In doing so, he has added a level of management through which communication between him and salesmen must pass and he has added the cost of three additional managers.) 
Management experts suggest that the ideal number of subordinates is four in case of higher-level management and eight to twelve in case of lower-level management. 

1.22 STAFFING 
Earlier staffing was considered to be a part of organization function of management. It is now recognized as a separate management function.The reason for separating the 
staffing from organizing is to give proper emphasis to the actual meaning of managerial roles.  
Today the staffing function has assumed greater importance because of rapid advancement of technology, increasing the size of the organization and complex 
behaviour of human beings. The enterprise has to give due importance to human resource planning. 

1.22.1 NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF STAFFING 
The various reasons which have increased the significance of staffing  Increasing size of organization:  Advancement in science and technology has given rise to large scale companies 
employing thousands of employees. The performance of the company depends on the quality and character of the people. This has increased the importance of staffing. Advancement of technology: In order to make use of latest technology, the appointment of right type of persons is necessary. Long-range needs of manpower:  
In some industries, labour turn-over is high. The management is required to determine the manpower requirement well in advance. Management has also to develop the existing personal for future promotion. The role of staffing has also increased because of shortage of good managerial talents. 

Recognition of human relations:  
The behaviour of individuals has become very complicated and hence human aspect of organization has become very important. Employees are to be motivated by financial and non-financial incentives. Right kind of atmosphere should also be created to contribute to the achievement of organizational objectives. By performing the staffing function, management can show the significance it attaches to the man power working in the enterprise.